chore(docs): adding k6 tracetest extension docs (#1901)
kubeshop/tracetest: docs/docs/tools-and-integrations/integrations/k6.md

# Running Tracetest with K6

[Tracetest](https://tracetest.io/) is a testing tool based on [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) that allows you to test your distributed application. It allows you to use your telemetry data generated by the OpenTelemetry tools to check and assert if your application has the desired behavior defined by your test definitions.

> [K6](https://k6.io/) is a powerful tool to run load tests against any type of services (REST, GRPC, GraphQL, etc), it is widely used by Developers, Site Reliability Engineers and Software Engineers in Test / QA teams to find potential issues when it comes to test real life scenarios in both controlled environments and production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[K6](https://k6.io/) is a powerful tool to run load tests against any type of services (REST, GRPC, GraphQL, etc). It is widely used by Developers, Site Reliability Engineers and Software Engineers in Test / QA teams to find potential issues when testing real life scenarios in both controlled environments and production.
```

## Why is this important?

> K6 as it's own is a great tool which allows you to replicate must of the production challenges you might find. But same as all of the tools that only test the initial transaction between the client side and the server, you can only run validations against the immediate response from the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
K6 is it's a great tool in its own right that allows you to replicate most of the production challenges you might encounter. But, as with all of the tools that only test the initial transaction between the client side and the server, you can only run validations against the immediate response from the service.
```

<div style="position: relative; padding-bottom: 62.5%; height: 0;"><iframe src="https://www.loom.com/embed/5c5e1261bb0b4fefa30081294378908c" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen allowfullscreen style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"></iframe></div>

## The K6 Tracetest Extension

> With the [K6 Tracetest extension](https://github.com/kubeshop/xk6-tracetest) you will unlock the power of OpenTelemetry that allow you run deeper test based on the traces and spans generated by each of the checkpoints that you define within your services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the [K6 Tracetest extension](https://github.com/kubeshop/xk6-tracetest), you will unlock the power of OpenTelemetry that allows you run deeper testing based on the traces and spans generated by each of the checkpoints that you define within your services.
```

> Language and Vendor agnostic, with this extension you can use your existing Tracing Data Store and Setup, to leverage the work you have already done to instrument your services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Language and Vendor agnostic, with this extension you can use your existing Tracing Data Store and Setup to leverage the work you have already done to instrument your services.
```

> ## How it Works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How It Works
```

> Here's a high level sequence diagram on how K6 and Tracetest interact with the different pieces of the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is high level sequence diagram on how K6 and Tracetest interact with the different pieces of the system.
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    K6->>+Extension: Trigger HTTP Request
    Extension->>+Extension: Generate Trace ID and propagation headers
    Extension->>+Instrumented Service: Sends request with tracing metadata
    Instrumented Service->>+Data Store: Sends Telemetry data
    Instrumented Service-->>-Extension: Returns Response
    Extension->>+Tracetest: Executes the test run using the trace id
    Tracetest->>+Data Store: Fetches trace using the trace id
    Data Store-->>-Tracetest: Returns trace
    Tracetest->>+Tracetest: Runs Assertions against the resulted trace
    Tracetest-->>-Extension: Returns the run results
    Extension-->>-K6: Display summary and results
```

## Requirements

**Trecetest Server:** You'll ned to have a running instance of Tracetest which is going to be executing your tests and assertions.

To do so you can follow the instructions defined in the [documentation](../../getting-started/installation.md)

**XK6:** To start using the Tracetest k6 binary you need to have the xk6 builder installed in your machine.
You can follow the instructions defined in this [page](https://github.com/grafana/xk6/) to do that.

> **OpenTelemetry Instrumented Service:** In order to generate traces and spans, the  service under test must support the basics for [propagation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/context/api-propagators/) thought HTTP requests as well as store traces and spans into a Data Store Backend (Jaeger, Grafana Tempo, OpenSearch, etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**OpenTelemetry Instrumented Service:** In order to generate traces and spans, the  service under test must support the basics for [propagation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/context/api-propagators/) through HTTP requests as well as store traces and spans into a Data Store Backend (Jaeger, Grafana Tempo, OpenSearch, etc).
```

## Installing the K6 Tracetest Extension

Installing the K6 Tracetest extension is as easy as running the following command:

```bash
xk6 build v0.42.0 --with github.com/kubeshop/xk6-tracetest
```

The instructions can be also found in the main [k6 docs](https://k6.io/docs/extensions/get-started/bundle/) in case you need to combine multiple extensions into one binary.

## Using the Tracetest Extension For Load Tests

> Once you have installed the K6 Tracetest binary, you can use the base k6 functionality it to run load tests against instrumented services and Tracetest to run checks against the resulted telemetry data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have installed the k6 Tracetest binary, you can use the base k6 functionality it to run load tests against instrumented services and Tracetest to run checks against the resulted telemetry data.
```

### Creating your Tracetest Test

> First step is to create the test that will be used to run the telemetry data validations, here is where we are going to create the assertions that will be executed for each of the runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is to create the test that will be used to run the telemetry data validations. In this step, we will create the assertions that will be executed for each of the runs.
```

To do so, you can either use the UI or the CLI.

**UI:**

> 1. Click the create button from the tracetest homepage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the Create button from the Tracetest homepage.
```

> 2. Select `TraceID` as the trigger mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select `TraceID` as the trigger mode.
```

> 3. Enter basic details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enter the basic details.
```

> 4. Choose the name of the variable you'll be using for the trace id (e.j TRACE_ID).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Choose the name of the variable you'll be using for the trace id (e.g. TRACE_ID).
```

> 5. Create and run the test with a random value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Create and run the test with a random value.
```

**CLI:**

> If you have the CLI configured you can save the following test definition to a local `.yaml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have the CLI configured, you can save the following test definition to a local `.yaml` file.
```

```yaml
type: Test
spec:
  id: kc_MgKoVR
  name: K6
  description: K6
  trigger:
    type: traceid
    traceid:
      id: ${env:TRACE_ID}
```

And create the test using the following command:

```bash
tracetest test run -d <name-of-the-file>
```

### Extension Features

The extension includes a new package which includes classes for HTTP requests and the main Tracetest instance.

> Can be imported as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be imported as following:
```

```javascript
import { Http, Tracetest } from "k6/x/tracetest";
```

**The HTTP Class:**

> The Http class is the primary entry point to execute requests, it extends the default `http` interface by generating parent trace ids and sending them as par of the propagation headers to the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HTTP class is the primary entry point to execute requests. It extends the default `http` interface by generating parent trace ids and sending them as part of the propagation headers to the request.
```

> To create an http instance and use it you can follow the next code sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create an HTTP instance and use it, you can follow the next code sample.
```

```javascript
// Tracetest test identifier
const testId = "<your-test-id>;

// creating the main http instance
const http = new Http();

// adding configuration whe creating the instance
const http = new Http({
  // supported propagators tracecontext, baggage, b3, ot, jaeger & xray
  propagators: ['b3'],

  // tracetest configuration 
  tracetest: {
    // define the triggered test id
    testId,
    // used variable name to inject the trace id to the test
    variableName: 'TRACE_ID',
  },
});

const url = "http://localhost:8081/pokemon/import";
const pokemonId = 6; // charizad
const payload = JSON.stringify({
    id: pokemonId,
  });

// using the http instance to trigger requests
const response = http.post(url, payload, const params = {
  headers: {
    "Content-Type": "application/json",
  },
};);

// overwriting the instance level config per request
const response = http.post(url, payload, {
  // same as the http instance config
  tracetest: {
    testId,
  },
  // rest of the regular http options
  headers: {
    "Content-Type": "application/json",
  },
});

// direct access to the trace id from the response object
console.log(response.trace_id)
```

> **The Tracetest Class:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The Tracetest Class**
```

The Tracetest class is the main breach between the k6 load tests and the Tracetest API, used to run the tests, validate the results and generate the summary response.

To create a Tracetest instance and use it you can follow the next code sample.

```javascript
const tracetest = Tracetest();

// adding your tracetest server configuration
const tracetest = Tracetest({
  serverUrl: "http://localhost:11633",
  serverPath: "",
});

// generating the summary
export function handleSummary(data) {
  // combine the default summary with the tracetest summary
  const tracetestSummary = tracetest.summary();
  const defaultSummary = textSummary(data);
  const summary = `
    ${defaultSummary}
    ${tracetestSummary}
  `;

  return {
    stdout: summary,
    // JSON summary object for CI/CD proposes
    "tracetest.json": tracetest.json(),
  };
}

// enable this to return a non-zero status code if a tracetest test fails
export function teardown() {
  // returns a non-zero code when any of the tracetest test fails
  tracetest.validateResult();
}

const metadata = {
  id: "123",
  url,
  method: "GET",
};

// manually running a test
tracetest.runTest(response.trace_id, { testId }, metadata);
```

> ### Using the custom output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using the Custom Output
```

> The Tracetest K6 extension includes an output you can use to automatically trigger the test for you using the predefined configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Tracetest K6 extension includes an output you can use to automatically trigger the test using the predefined configuration.
```

In this case, you can avoid manually using:

```javascript
tracetest.runTest(response.trace_id, { testId }, metadata);
```

> And just focus on writing the http triggers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And just focus on writing the HTTP triggers.
```

> To use this feature you can update you can use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this feature, you can use the following command:
```

[Request=POST - http://localhost:8081/pokemon/import, TraceID=dc0718fff1aca9de30b702c3a1bfad75, RunState=FINISHED FailingSpecs=true, TracetestURL= http://localhost:3000/test/kc_MgKoVR/run/275] 
[Request=POST - http://localhost:8081/pokemon/import, TraceID=dc0718b8daaca9de301e39889afca15b, RunState=FINISHED FailingSpecs=true, TracetestURL= http://localhost:3000/test/kc_MgKoVR/run/276] 
[Request=POST - http://localhost:8081/pokemon/import, TraceID=dc0718a7e2aca9de30955b5203b162a7, RunState=FINISHED FailingSpecs=true, TracetestURL= http://localhost:3000/test/kc_MgKoVR/run/273] 
[Request=POST - http://localhost:8081/pokemon/import, TraceID=dc0718edf9aca9de305916d7b1e7814c, RunState=FINISHED FailingSpecs=true, TracetestURL= http://localhost:3000/test/kc_MgKoVR/run/274] 
[SUCCESSFUL] 
[Request=POST - http://localhost:8081/pokemon/import, TraceID=dc0718c9d2aca9de3044a794f7248eab, RunState=FINISHED FailingSpecs=false, TracetestURL= http://localhost:3000/test/kc_MgKoVR/run/271]
```

Indicating which test failed, the status and links to look at the results directly from the UI.

### Non-Zero status

> An important feature is to been able to integrate the extension with your CI/CD tools. In this case the tracetest class allows you to validate the results during the k6 `teardown` lifecycle event which returns a fail status in case any of the test run fails. A failed test can be defined as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An important use case is to integrate the extension with your CI/CD tools. In this case, the Tracetest class allows you to validate the results during the k6 `teardown` lifecycle event which returns a failed status if any of the test run fails. A failed test can be defined as:
```

- The trace could not be fetched from the data store

> - Any of the test specs failed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Any of the test specs failed.
```

- Could not connect to the Tracetest API.
- An execution error from the Tracetest Server side.

To enable this, you can simply add the following to your test script:

```javascript
// enable this to return a non-zero status code if a tracetest test fails
export function teardown() {
  tracetest.validateResult();
}
```

### Configuration and Environment variables

> If you want to reuse your test scripts for multiple environments and want to avoid hardcoding values like the server url and/or path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to reuse your test scripts for multiple environments and to avoid hardcoding values like the server url and/or path, use the following configuration variables to achieve this:
```

> You can use the following configuration variables to achieve that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

**XK6_TRACETEST_SERVER_URL:** Allows you to set the server url for the entire test script.

> usage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usage:
```

```bash
XK6_TRACETEST_SERVER_URL=<your-server-url> k6 run <your-script>.js -o xk6-tracetest
```

> You can also define the global server url by passing it as an output parameter like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also define the global server url by passing it as an output parameter:
```

```bash
k6 run <your-script>.js -o xk6-tracetest=<your-server-url>
```

**XK6_TRACETEST_SERVER_PATH:** Allows you to set the server path for the entire test script.

> usage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usage:
```

```bash
XK6_TRACETEST_SERVER_PATH=<your-server-path> k6 run <your-script>.js -o xk6-tracetest
```

> Need more ways to configure it? let us know!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Need more ways to configure it? Let us know!
```

## Full Script Example

> Here's how a full script example using the K6 Tracetest extension looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a full script example using the k6 Tracetest extension:
```

  vus: 1,
  duration: "6s",
};

const tracetest = Tracetest({
  serverUrl: "http://localhost:11633",
});
const testId = "kc_MgKoVR";
let pokemonId = 6; // charizad
const http = new Http();
const url = "http://localhost:8081/pokemon/import";

export default function () {
  const payload = JSON.stringify({
    id: pokemonId,
  });
  const params = {
    tracetest: {
      testId,
    },
    headers: {
      "Content-Type": "application/json",
    },
  };

  const response = http.post(url, payload, params);

  check(response, {
    "is status 200": (r) => r.status === 200,
    "body matches de id": (r) => JSON.parse(r.body).id === pokemonId,
  });

  pokemonId = pokemonId + 1;
  sleep(1);
}

// enable this to return a non-zero status code if a tracetest test fails
export function teardown() {
  tracetest.validateResult();
}

export function handleSummary(data) {
  // combine the default summary with the tracetest summary
  const tracetestSummary = tracetest.summary();
  const defaultSummary = textSummary(data);
  const summary = `
    ${defaultSummary}
    ${tracetestSummary}
  `;

  return {
    stdout: summary,
    "tracetest.json": tracetest.json(),
  };
}
```

## Get Started

> If you want to learn or just want to try a full setup using K6 and Tracetest you can head out to this `tracetest-k6` get-started [example](https://github.com/kubeshop/tracetest/tree/main/examples/tracetest-k6) we have prepared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to learn or just want to try a full setup using k6 and Tracetest you can head out to this `tracetest-k6` get-started [example](https://github.com/kubeshop/tracetest/tree/main/examples/tracetest-k6) we have prepared.
```
